Evening.
Good evening, sir. Good evening, sir. Uh, good evening.
Yeah, good evening sir. Good evening.
20 people have joined.
Let me wait for two more minutes then I'll start.
Yeah, sure sir.
Let me start. How many people have joined
Policy gradient today?
I'm going to teach 29.
Okay, let me start. So today the topic is
policy gradient.
I did not share the screen. I think
so
what think
policy gradient student's date is
21 January.
Okay, so policy gradient is till now,
whatever we're doing us is value based
policy evaluation.
So what we have learned till now is under model three.
So under model three we have learned
Montecarlo TD learning,
TDN learning, TD
Lambda Learning, and then we have
Q learning,
deep Q learning, DQN, okay,
these are things we have learned.
All of these are basically
value-based
method,
policy-based method and value-based method.
The differences, whenever we are talking about
evaluating the expected, some
of discounted reward in every state,
it is basically called value-based method.
Now, uh, if I want to know which particular action
that can maximize your expected, um, expected sum
of discounted reward, that is called policy-based action.
So somewhat this Q learning is basically somewhat, it has
policy-based flavor,
okay?
It has some policy-based flavor
because you are defining Q function to be
at a particular state of ace, which action is going
to maximize your expected sum of discounted reward.
Okay? So in case of policy gradient,
so here in this case in queue learning,
you are updating your queue of the new estimate
for every state
and action from the old state
or from the old of old estimate of your
this plus alpha multiplied by
reward plus your next state.
That is maximization over a dash
for your queue function at the next state.
Okay? Here is old estimate, this minus
of old estimate of SK
and ak.
So this we have been doing for deep two learning also
then the bracket N Cs this bracket, okay?
So instead of doing direct estimation of the queue function
or value function policy gradient is directly, it is trying
to, policy means policy is basically called
probability of A given S.
This is a call policy.
So we are going to estimate this directly instead of
finding an action which is going to give your maximum
expected sum of discounted reward.
Instead of that we want to find out this quantity.
So that is probability
of taking action at a particular state of his.
Okay? So policy gradient theorem is the
most important technique for finding out this thing.
Okay? So for doing that,
there is a policy gradient theorem.
I'm going to show you what is the meaning of that theorem.
I'm not going to write the theorem.
That is there is a utility function, it's called utility.
So this utility function is a parameterized by theta.
So there is a neural network which is going
to decide just like we have done for DQ learning,
you are providing input as your state
and your output layer is having all possible
action for every state.
Okay? So by the help of
neural network, we are going to train this Q function.
Similarly, instead of training at Q function, we are going
to estimate this probability of a givenness.
That means you're going to estimate the
policy for every state.
Okay? So the utilities basically
expected some of discounted that we're going to maximize.
So we are going to maximize over there networks parameter.
So that is basically expected
sum of discounted reward.
So gamma to the RT and then rt.
Okay? This is expected sum of discounted reward.
Given that you are following, given
that you're following a,
okay, just a second, my battery is low.
Okay? So let me tell you one thing that is, we are going
to train a neural network for which we are going
to find out this utility
or expected some discounted reward under the policy
and we are going to find out that what kind of policy
that will maximize this thing.
So this job is basically maximization of
this quantity, maximization of
utility value maximizing over the
is the weight parameter of the neural network.
Okay? So this one till now,
whatever we're doing is we are fixing a policy,
we evaluate the policy
and then we improve the policy little bit.
Then you get a new policy.
That new policy are evaluating like that that we used
to in this case Q learning and all this thing here.
In this case, we're not going to do it like that,
that we are going to do this submission with respect
to a neural network parameter.
Okay? So it means basically for every
episode you are going to run a
policy for every episode you're gonna run a policy, you
complete the episode, find the reward,
then you do a back prop of the reward
to find the value for every state,
and then you change a little bit in some
of the state's action, you get a new policy.
That new policy, again, you are going to run it
for one episode or multiple episode, get
the reward coming out from the last date.
You do this repeatedly again and again.
So basically we're need to define what is called episode.
So Tao is the episode here.
So the episode is denoted by Tao
and Tao is basically what is here.
Given you are starting from the A,
not you are taking action A not
then at times step one you are into migrating
to state called S one.
Again, you're taking action A one at a state of a S one,
select that this will go on up to a ST
and then 80 finally you'll be landing up
to the last date.
Well, ST plus
what you may considered is your T minus on your T minus on.
So here it is just t,
this is the episode is ending.
So it is a episode basically we call it
as a single projectile, which is consisting of state action.
State action pair, okay?
For every action that you take, you receive it reward.
Here it is or not.
Every action that you take, you'll receive a reward.
R one like that, you'll receive a reward, RT minus one
sense like that it goes on.
So this reward is available from here,
all these intermediate step,
they may not have the reward directly available to you.
So you get the reward.
Then you back propagate the reward
by diminishing this gamma factor.
Okay? So,
so now this EW function.
You user a utility parameters by theater.
So previously before policy gradient, what we used to write,
we used to write this that
maximize
before policy gradient, we used to do this,
you have
a value function.
So probability of a given, a multiplied by.
So this sum will be taken over all possible action.
Then probability of next state, given that you underst state
of S from A,
and then you take a reward plus gamma multiplied by
value function available to the next state.
Okay? So this, we have been doing
maximization over
this action A like that, okay?
We have been doing this in case of model based.
In case of model three, we don't have this knowledge.
So what we do, we try to do this
instead of this we,
so whenever we do this ion over a, in
that case this, this will not come this part
because you are not going
to do the averaging operation if you want
to do a maximization over a.
Mm-hmm. So this part will be here
maximization over A, okay?
Then we are going to do this for the case of model three.
What we have been doing, instead of doing this, we want
to find out expectation over is a
next status is tasked expectation over this for the quantity
of this 1D word plus
gamma multiplied by D is test, okay?
This is what we have been doing for our
model free based approach.
You can also write this as expectation
of all this quantity.
This is a set, okay? Expectation for all this variable.
Four sum of discounted reward.
Sum of discounted reward is gamma to the part of T.
Reward is RT
2 0 2 capital H.
Capital H means zero.
Total number of you can consider you have T number of times
in a particular and steps.
Yeah. So it'll be capital,
it'll be total number of times available, okay?
So that we have been doing for our IT learning
and all, okay?
In case of policy gradient, we are going to do it.
This quantity will remain the same.
Only thing is that what
projectile we are choosing
that projectile is projectile means a set
of state action pair.
Okay? An episode like this,
this is also called a projectile tao.
This is also called a traject.
So in case of, so this is basically your
model footage,
okay?
In case of Monte Carlo,
and in case of TD learning,
this expectation is taken in a different, different manner.
That is the only difference between Monte Carlo
and TD learning.
Okay? Monte Carlo will go for the complet completion
of the entire episode.
Then only it'll find out the reward.
However, TD learning will not wait
for the completion of the entire episode.
It'll take one particular action,
it'll get into the next state from the next state.
It'll find out if any hello available
at that next state or not.
Based on that it'll decide. Okay?
So in case of queue, uh, your policy gradient,
it is going to be like this
maximization of
this part.
Again, expectation of
some of discounted reward
given that you have a network weight parameter is theta
and then this expectation, you have
to value this theta parameter again
and again so that you get a new quantity over here
and whatever new quantity you are getting, okay?
It is a result of changing this parameter
and this parameter represents, it is a representative
of your policy.
Policy means set off.
This is a poli episode, okay?
This episode is drawn for a policy.
You can draw another episode
for the same policy like that.
You keep a policy,
you can draw multiple episode from the same policy.
You can find out this thing
changing very, very ly.
However, if you change the policy
and draw another new episode, this submission
that might be changing drastically, okay?
So here it is going to maximize this with respect
to the network parameter called the, okay.
So now for doing this,
since we know that or doing any deep learning
or doing anything deep learning based technique,
this is a the,
okay, so this is going
to be written like this.
It is so expectation means some of
some function multiplied by the probability.
So probability of choosing
product, of choosing a projectile Tao
from a, I mean given theta
when it's given a particular policy,
I'm choosing a projectile that is a probability, okay?
This multiplied by
au means reward for the projectile
tragical means is not a one, A one like that.
Okay? So this submission is happening over,
this is a probability of choosing a towel.
Okay? So this one is basically you may have multiple towel.
So this ion is probably of choosing a towel.
So this sum over towel, okay?
So now this is your U
utility function that you have written.
Now, okay, now for doing everything we are,
we're going to maximize this.
This job is basically maximizing over the, so again,
this job will be maximizing over the, okay?
So to do that,
to do the maximization over theta, we need
to take a gradient of you theta
with respect to theta.
So this gradient is a little theta.
I'm not writing maximum because we have
to set this gradient to zero.
Then only we can find out ation. Okay?
So then this gradient will need to find out
gradient for the sum.
Uh, this is tall probability
or ta multiplied by reward
for that particular episode.
Okay? So gradient of
sum, this submission can come outside,
the submission can come outside.
Gradient will go inside
probably of Tao.
I'm writing this comma, okay?
Because tau is a function of, Tao is a function of theta.
Okay? So this becomes that.
So it'll now turn out to be over Tao
Tao gradient for this.
So there is a log trick that we need to apply.
That log trick is supposed, you want to find out derivative
of,
okay?
So before that I will just take one more step.
That is we will multiply this thing by probability of tau
given the, and divide the same quantity.
So we'll multiply this with probability of tau
and we'll
this gradient remains as it is here, tau
theta, this de divided wipe probability of tau
given the this
and algebra step.
Okay? Um,
this time this can be canceled.
So this will remain as it is here, okay?
I'm just, just taking a trick here.
Now here there is a trick called derivative of log.
So derivative of,
so it is one by X.
What is the value of tau here, sir?
Tau? Tau value is, it is a set of state action payer,
Yes sir, we can use yes instead of Tao, right?
Why do we need to use a different for
No, no, yes stands for set of state only.
And this is state consisting
of state action payer state action payer.
Okay? So
this one is this.
So you can uh, think of like this,
this dx, if you put it on this side, what it'll become
DX here and here it'll be X.
So XD log X
is basically D of X.
Okay? In other way,
mm, sorry D of log X you can,
so D of log X is basically DX x,
Hmm
Dx YX fine.
So instead of this is a proper derivative.
If you think of a partial derivative,
it'll become like this.
If you think of partial derivative instead
of a proper derivative, this gradient
of log X, nothing
but gradient of X
divided by X.
Okay? So here what is, this is gradient of a function
divided by the same function.
So you can think of this function is X here, this is X here.
So gradient of X divided by X.
So gradient of X divided by XI think,
but gradient of log of X.
Okay? So here, keeping this as your
note, this will now
become it change the color.
So this will now become this part alone.
So this submission over T demands
as it is probability of tau given theta.
This part we can write gradient of log.
So gradient of log,
probability of tau,
you can this and this will be au.
Okay?
So this what, so this is a function
entire thing is a function you can consider this is entire
thing as a function which change the color.
So from here to here, okay,
this is a function of
Tao and theta you can think of
because there's a derivative with respect to theta here.
So this is derivative theta, okay?
We can consider this is a function
and this function is multiplied by the probability.
So this probability of
this and function oft
this is nothing but expectation of this function.
Okay? And this expectation is taken over stop.
Okay? So
let me change the color back here.
So this is how this is turning out to be here.
Do you know that?
So this one is expectation formula.
Hmm, But why we are doing all this? Uh,
Because this is what is policy gradient.
If you don't, uh, if I do not
do this in front of you, you will not.
Yeah, yeah. 'cause after this only will start into the
main part of policy gradient, which is called
chat GT's main, uh, main brain behind it is this part.
Mm-hmm. No, this I understand for back prop, but
No, this is not back until now. This is
Okay, the gradient, we found
This gradient part only, yeah,
Yeah. So
this is the optimal tau, is it?
No, for particular tau, we are going
to find out the gradient with this kind of expression.
The gradient will become this kind of expression.
We'll change the tau again for that.
Also, we will again compute the gradient.
Gradient means we,
after finding the gradient, we are going
to update our weight parameter.
So this is basically we are
uh, going to now
after this applying
Montecarlo technique, we take this direct average.
So let's say you have aim number of state
and action pair here, okay?
So for that, this is your function, okay?
So you have aim number of state that you're going over.
So basically tau, length of tau is aim.
That means aim number of states you have in your episode.
So this, what you do is
take the submission for the i eighth.
So tower I means the i eighth
episode you have drawn, which has AIM number of states.
And this aim is constant for all the I.
Okay, so this, we are going to do this now.
So if I want to find out the average, what I do, I take
this,
okay?
I take for all the occurrence of I for this function,
divide by and do the submission.
So this submission is going over
all the I which is all your episodes that you can draw
from a particular policy.
Okay? So this is what we're going to do and what is your if,
so this is what submission for all
of your i your if nothing
but gradient of
log probability to
I and reward
for the I eighth to, okay?
Now this thing we have gonna take a log
and then it's gradient.
So there are lot of as approximation,
this is our mathematics talk about.
Now we cannot find a gradient of probability of tau.
We cannot do that. So there are a lot
of approximation chat.
GPT team that is open AI team, they had came up
with one approximation in 2021.
In 2024, deep seek came up with some other approximation
and apparently deep seek approximation is doing better than
open eyes approximation.
So this is what is the crux of this is a difficult problem
to crack and sadly India is nowhere in
this waste.
It is all because of the blindfolded ness
of reliance on IIT.
Can I just explain this, uh, equation.
So what exactly this mean?
Uh, so like I have some inference based on this equation.
Like we take this, uh, gradient of tta.
So the TTA is that neural network parameter,
just like we have the weight parameters.
So changing of the weight parameters will, uh, so
what is the change in the weight parameters will lead
to the probability of the tragic time and
accordingly we are getting the written.
So this what some rough meaning
of this equation, sir? Mm-hmm.
Yes, yes. So this is what is gradient of your
and e is the objective function.
Okay? So what we know to update our, let's see,
this is my JJ plus one of the neur network weight
by update from
the previous ation.
This since I'm doing a maximization of my utility function.
So I'll do a plus operation here.
This plus of this gradient, gradient was
to theta four
U, okay?
And J time whatever value the theta was coming up.
So we have to find out this thing.
Then we just, plus with your previous parameter of the,
you get a new the, for that new theater that values,
you're just changing your way.
You are going to get a new projectile for that.
And then you keep on doing the same thing again and again.
Okay? So this is your gradient
of your objective function, this part.
And with this objective function,
you update your theta parameter.
As a result of that, you're going to get new towel
and all at some point of time you are not going
to get a new towel at that point of time, you have
to take a drastic change in the data so
that you get a new policy.
So there are a lot of, so this is a
mathematical expression, this not solvable.
So we, there are a lot of approximation
every company has made.
So we are going to learn an important thing called
what open eye did called PPO, proximal policy optimization
after three lectures and all, we'll get into this, okay?
So this is called policy gradient. This part, okay?
And this one, whatever I did to you with this whiteboard,
the same thing is given to my, I have this P pt,
Sorry, one question. This
expectation, uh, two, that one
by NM,
that average, uh,
Yeah, you're talking about here?
Yeah sir, how did this one by M come?
Okay? So it is like this.
Suppose you wanna find out expectation of
your height of the
set of students present in your class, okay?
So this exploration of age, what do we do?
We find out the individual height of every student.
So H one is one first student, H two is second student.
Like that you have, let's say aim number of student.
Hm, okay? Total submission is this.
You divide this by aim, okay?
This is how we find out the average thing, right?
So here, H one, these are individual sample, okay?
You take all the samples, count them,
divide by number of samples.
That is what we are doing here.
You have to find out this expectation for this function.
Okay? So you're taking one projectile.
So you have tau one, you're taking secondary tau tool
that you have AIM number of tau, okay?
So for each tau, that is tau one, tau two
and all, you are going to get a hello
for this thing if au this thing, which is again
this complex expression,
forget about the complex expression.
So for every tau you're going to get, if auo one catheter,
if tau two like that,
take individual value, do the submission.
That is this submission.
This submission is happening over all the samples.
You have only aim number of transition
possible within a single episode.
So you have a small aim number of samples.
So take the sum do you have by aim? That is,
Okay, So, so one more like clarity required on this,
uh, trajectory selection, sir.
Like I suppose you say to, it's a set of, uh,
state action path, like right from ranging from SNT
or to all the way to S3 80.
So like suppose I a just, uh, uh, they,
they take a similar analogy in a grid, three way grid.
So one tower is that
how the agent moves from the start point to the endpoint?
So what action it takes in one episode.
So that is called one state action pace, which is selected.
So that's called one tower.
Tao is like this, we don't draw that.
So your tower is basically, let's say this is your grid,
which you're moving this,
let's say this is your destination,
you want to come to this destination
starting from here, okay?
So one policy is like this.
Like this is your policy for every state you have a policy.
This is one policy, okay?
So your tower will be, so your s not comma a knot.
S one comma A one, this zero
one their time instant, okay?
They're not particular state number.
So this is a collection of all this thing, yes.
Consider S two here, A two here.
This will go on up to T. This is your tower.
Now this is not
cons conditioning fact that your starting state is this.
So it's not, let's say this is state number
0, 1, 2, 3, 2, 5, 6, 7, 8.
So this is zero. Your a o is chosen from this policy.
That is your a o at this state.
Your policy is already described.
So at the state, your A anot is this S one,
this S one, it can be this.
If this is slippery ano, it can be this, it can be this.
It can be back to snot also.
So here in your snot, your S one, there is zero,
there is one, there is three.
These are the possible states.
Then you have a one under every cell you have
a predefined policy.
So that is your A one, let it be a one itself. Okay?
Then S two at times step two.
Where are you? Depending on what times, uh,
what was your state in your previous times step,
let us consider You have been in chosen to this cell.
So you times step two from one.
From one, you can go to either here
or you can be back at here or you can be here.
So it'll be 1, 2, 4, like that.
And a two is a action chosen at times step two.
So like that, it goes on.
So now your tau, tau one,
your T one is basically you start from state number zero,
your action is already specified A zero.
Then suppose you chose
zero back again here your action is a one here, okay?
After zero you might choose your next state at zero.
Again, your next zero, one and three.
So again, these are your next state from zero again. Okay?
So here, let's say you're choosing three at times.
Step two, direction is a two.
So like that, this will go grow, right?
Again, without changing policy, without changing any policy,
your tau two, tau two will be, again,
you're starting the game from starting this A,
not at that position.
You may choose one to be your next date, okay?
Otherwise you keep this,
keep doing it is the same old tau you are getting.
So you have to get new tab.
So this is your A one and a new state of one.
You may have next possibility one, two,
and 4, 1, 2 and four.
You may choose this. Two be two,
and then you have a two over here.
Let's say you're choosing four state is four at times.
Step two actually is two, like that. This will go on.
Understood, okay. Yes.
So basically the policy will remain same,
but the actions which you're taking at that instant of time,
what is the policy you're using?
So that will keep bearing.
So accordingly, our uh, this thing
At some point of time, since you're not changing policy at
some point of time you have exhausted all possible Yes.
Combination of tau. Yes. Okay.
So that means you have updated your three parameters.
So many of time. So much of time.
So at some point of time you may not observe any changes
of your network weight parameters, correct?
So at that position then you have to do a,
which is beyond this setting
to get a new policy for that.
Again, there are some approximation steps,
appro steps proposed by all these companies, those
who are competing against each other.
Sir, one question. So this A keeps on wearing, right?
Sorry, the S keeps on wearing.
So Tao, I cannot be
assumed as a constant.
Yes. Keeps on, I have shown to you your A one every action
of your a I write it J, okay?
Index by JA, not a one A to everything.
You have four possible left, right, up
and down, and then every
action you have next state to be like
that based on your slippery environment.
So it is a lot of complexity.
That is first complexity is number
of state possible in every, uh, sub, uh, I mean
index here at the state you have three.
For every one of three, you have four possibilities here.
So four multiplied by three,
that is 12 element combination here itself in this part.
So like that you have eight number of states.
So eight multiplied by 12.
That is a complexity for one single t.
Hmm. So what tau
of one can be chosen from eight multiplied by 12?
That many combinations.
Okay? So I mean one, one tower of one
in one competition is not the same
as the another time, right?
So, uh, so if this is the case, then yeah,
our policy also keeps on changing.
Ah, yes, no, your policy is not changing.
We have specified action is here.
So these are the main possible action.
But for every this, this a not
what is the action it is right for a one.
What is the action? It is up, it is up here.
So this is your policy by which you can find out.
So at that position, this variability will not come Mm,
if you fix the policy, okay?
There are, there are a lot of
research papers coming from open ai, Germany
and all they say that don't fix the policy
at every action you take, you go
for searching a new policy like that.
So there are a lot of work going on here it is
active area of research.
That's why. So here
The do looks like an episode, right?
Or what's the difference between episode and tau?
In this case your Tao is
your episode means you're going to take t number
of trial, okay?
Tau is a configuration of the episode.
Configuration means this like this tau one
is this configuration.
Tau two is this configuration.
So you have to complete a whole t number of tiles.
That is called you're completing a episode.
So episode you are not going
to repeat the same behavior again and again.
That is why you have tau two be denoted,
just have had able to be denoted like that.
Okay?
Okay. So next class I will show you from this thing
from my own, uh, pity that I have drawn for um,
written for this same thing.
So all of them has been written here,
whatever I have derived it here, it is written,
but I have derived it from the blank so
that you can understand how things are flow.
If I at one shot, if I show you, you will get frightened.
Okay? So I will not take anything more than today's
class on this.
If you have any more question, you can ask otherwise.
We'll sir, end up that class
Sir. This
fl TD learning IP Y
and B, this Python file we don't have,
you were showing in some classes before.
Ah, everything has been shared. Uh,
No sir. We,
I mean at least I asked the classmates also.
Nobody could get me this fl under TD learning.
Lemme check.
Failed TD learning.
The LTD learning you mean, right?
Yes, sir. And any other file, what you have
explain, but we don't have
TD learning, learning
learning here.
It is not here.
Theq learning. I shared it too. Okay, I'll do that.
I'll send it is in my personal, my my personal.
Anything else?
No, please me, sir. One more.
Yeah, sir. Other than PPO,
what are the other approximations
that we learn in this course?
No, you don't have to learn it. Keep yourself quite big.
Yes, sir. So one more question here sir.
So in this policy gradient, basically it is more of, uh,
higher the reward, increase the
probability, and then lower the reward.
We decrease the probability.
So this is, uh, almost seeming like Grady algorithm, right?
So how is it different compared
to the top Grady algorithm, sir?
How, uh, yeah.
So every
gradient, this all basically gradient based technique, okay?
So gradient based technique all the time we try to uh,
find out the faster derivative
and then update our network weight
in a particular direction so that the function
that you're optimizing,
it'll make you move towards your desire, duration.
How that maximizing or it is minimizing, okay?
So every gradient, this mechanism,
they are local optimization and they are greedy.
This is a greedy mechanism also.
Okay? Okay.
Reinforcement learning is basically you are, you want
to take a particular policy that will maximize your reward.
So it is from the by it isy.
Good. Uh, Like, uh, last quiz which we attended, sir,
I said there is some clarification required
on one of the questions.
Um, you able to discuss now or the next lesson?
Uh, you ask the question in email.
Okay, Sir, because right now I don't, uh,
I didn't remember the question itself.
So you write that question second, email
Second. So can we share it in chat?
Uh, maybe you could have
I got it wrong. Email.
Send us an email, Okay.
Okay, sir. That works.
Anything else? Then you can close the class today.
Thank You. Okay, so
Thank You sir. We'll see
Saturday then. Okay?
Yeah. Thank you.